Bulletin for Updates to Navigation API (#3343)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/navigateevent-intercept/index.md

---
title: Changes to NavigateEvent in Chrome 105
description: >
  The Navigation API gets two new methods on NavigateEvent: intercept() replaces transitionWhile() and scroll() replaces restoreScroll().
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
date: 2022-08-04
tags:
  - chrome-105
  - capabilities
hero: 'image/sQ51XsLqKMgSQMCZjIN0B7hlBO02/CdDfdtqJPPTeVCd3QqRR.jpeg'
alt: >
  A saiboat navigating the big blue waters.
authors:
  - joemedley
---

> Chrome 105 introduces two new methods on the `NavigateEvent` of the Navigation API (introduced in 102) to improve on methods that have proved problematic in practice. `Intercept()`, which let's developers control the state following the navigation, replaces `transitionWhile()`, which proved difficult to use. The `scroll()` method, which scrolls to an anchor specified in the URL, replaces `restoreScroll()` which does not work for all types of navigation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chrome 105 introduces two new methods on the `NavigateEvent` of the Navigation API (introduced in 102) to improve on methods that have proved problematic in practice. `intercept()`, which let's developers control the state following the navigation, replaces `transitionWhile()`, which proved difficult to use. The `scroll()` method, which scrolls to an anchor specified in the URL, replaces `restoreScroll()` which does not work for all types of navigation. 
```

In this article, I'll explain the problems with both and how the new methods fix those problems.

## NavigateEvent.transitionWhile()

The `NavigateEvent.trasitionWhile()` method, introduced with the Navigation API in Chrome 102, intercepts navigation for client-side transitions in single page apps. Its first argument is a promise that signals to the browser and to other parts of the web application that it's finished.

This worked poorly in practice. Consider this common coding pattern:

```js
event.transitionWhile((async () => {
  doSyncStuff();
  await doAsyncStuff();
})());
```

> This is functionally equivalent to the code below. It causes some portion of the navigation to run before the navigation is even finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is functionally equivalent to the code below. It causes some portion of the navigation to run before API is aware that the developer intends to intercept the navigation.
```

```js
doSyncStuff();
event.transitionWhile((async () => {
  await doAsyncStuff();
})());
```

> One example where this can mess up an app is in scroll restoration logic where it acts on the DOM before the navigation transition instead of after. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example where this can mess up an app is in scroll restoration logic where it captures scroll positions after the DOM change, rather than before. 
```

### What's changed

> To replace `transitionWhile()`, the current spec introduces `NavigateEvent.intercept()`. The new method takes a handler in addition to the `focusReset` and `scrollRestoration` properties supported by `transitionWhile()`. The new handler always runs after the navigation completes, avoiding the problems with `transitionWhile()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To replace `transitionWhile()`, the current spec introduces `NavigateEvent.intercept()`. The new method takes a handler in addition to the `focusReset` and `scrollRestoration` properties supported by `transitionWhile()`. The new handler always runs after the navigation commits, and things like scroll positions have been captured, avoiding the problems with `transitionWhile()`.
```

The `transitionWhile()` method is still available, but it has been deprecated and will be removed in Chrome 108.

### Using intercept()

> The `NavigateEvent.intercept()` cannot be used on all events. If the current `Document` object has a URL that can be rewritten to a destination URL, `intercept()` may be called. You can't call it on cross-document back/forward navigations. Doing so will throw a [`DOMException`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/DOMException) of the `"SecurityError"` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `NavigateEvent.intercept()` has the same restrictions as `transitionWhile()`, as in it cannot be called on all navigation events. Cross-origin navigations cannot be intercepted, neither can cross-document traversals. Doing so will throw a [`DOMException`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/DOMException) of the `"SecurityError"` type.
```

When I first read this, I thought it was suggesting that `intercept()` has more restrictions than `transitionWhile()`.

To use `intercept()`, simply pass your custom handler when calling it. 

```js
navigation.addEventListener("navigate", event => {

>   event.intercept({
>     handler() {
>       return new Promise(resolve => setTimeout(resolve, 1000));
>     }
>   });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  event.intercept({
    async handler() {
      doSyncStuff();
      await doAsyncStuff();
    }
  });
```

I thought it'd be nice to bring back the example from earlier than didn't work in the old API.

Author: Good call!

});
```

## NavigateEvent.scroll()

A navigation such as one from the top of the page to an anchor (call it moving from `/a` to `/a#id`) is handled completely by the browser even in a single page app. But navigating to an anchor on another 'page' (`/a` to `/b#id`), which is simple for multi page apps, is more complicated for single page apps. The app has to intercept the navigation to `/b#id` using `NavigateEvent.transitionWhile()`, then call `NavigateEvent.restoreScroll()` to bring the anchor into view. As stated above, this is currently hard to do.

### What's changed

In single page apps, you can now control whether the browser handles scrolling to an anchor or whether your code does.

### Using scroll()

> To let the browser handle the scrolling, first pass the `scroll` property to `intercept()` with a value of `"after-transition"`. For example:
> 
> ```js/5
> navigation.addEventListener("navigate", event => {
>   event.intercept({
>     handler() {
>       // Handle it;
>     },
>     scroll: "after-transition"
>   });
> });
> ```
> 
> If you want to handle the scrolling yourself, set `scroll` to `"manual"`, then call `NavigateEvent.scroll()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the browser will attempt to handle scrolling automatically, once the intercept hander has fulfilled. If you want to handle the scrolling yourself, set `scroll` to `"manual"`, then call `NavigateEvent.scroll()` when the browser should attempt to set the scroll position.
```

```js/4,6

> navigation.addEventListener("manual", event => {
>   event.intercept({
>     handler() {
>       // Handle it;
>       this.scroll();
>     },
>     scroll: "after-transition"
>   });
> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
navigation.addEventListener("manual", event => {
  scroll: "manual",
  event.intercept({
    async handler() {
      doSyncStuff();
      // Handle scrolling earlier than by default:
      event.scroll();
      await doAsyncStuff();
    }
  });
});
```

Again, working on from the earlier example (also correcting the scroll value).

```

The `restoreScroll()` method is still available, but it has been deprecated and will be removed in Chrome 108.

## Conclusion

> We hope to soon update our article on the Navigation API. In the meantime, [the spec for this API](https://wicg.github.io/navigation-api/) contains much information specifically for web developers.

Reviewer: > We hope to soon update our article on the Navigation API.

Working on it now 😄

By default, the browser will attempt to handle scrolling automatically, once the intercept hander has fulfilled. If you want to handle the scrolling yourself, set `scroll` to `"manual"`, then call `NavigateEvent.scroll()` when the browser should attempt to set the scroll position.

> ```js/2,8

Reviewer: doh, thanks for catching this. I saw that I needed to update this, but I guess I just forgot.

Author: np
